Imitation really is built into human nature.
It’s one of our most used
and powerful learning tools.
I mean, think of all the things
that you’ve learned by imitation.
Even just think
of the current work assignments you have
or your job.
How much of it did you learn
by just watching someone else do that work?
Children imitate their parents
when they learn how to speak,
think, eat, and even walk just like them.
Children even learn to imitate
the very subtle accents of their parents,
and those accents get passed on
from one generation to the next.
I’ve had people say to me,
“John, you walk just like your father.”
I have no idea how that happened.
Sometimes we imitate others,
and we don’t even know that we’re doing it.
Have you ever been listening to the radio,
and a few hours later
you’re humming or singing a song,
and you realize that that was the very song
that was on the radio several hours ago?
Imitation is such a part
of the human learning experience
that we’re doing it all the time.
We can’t turn it off.
Imitation is also used by animals
to learn their skills
by watching their parents.
I saw the cutest example of this
when we were watching
a herd of elephants in Zambia.
The mother elephant
and the baby elephant were walking by,
and the baby elephant
was trying to grab some grass
and tear it off and put it in his mouth
like his mother was;
but every time he did it,
he ended up with nothing.
But he was sure watching his mom
—how she was doing it—
and seeing how he could imitate
and get some of that for himself.
Well, since imitation
is such a powerful learning tool
and has such an effect on the person we are
and the person that we are to become,
we need to be very careful
about who we choose to imitate.
Who do you choose to imitate?
Well, see, who we choose to imitate
determines who we want to become.
That’s why there’s so much caution
in the Scriptures about our association,
because who we choose to imitate
rubs off on us, so to speak,
in subtle ways
that we might not even notice right away.
Notice the counsel given to the Israelites
about not imitating the nations around them.
If you look at Exodus 23:24,
notice the counsel
that Jehovah gave to the Israelites.
He said:
“You must not bow down to their gods
“or be persuaded to serve them,
and you must not imitate their practices.”
And he continues this thought
at Deuteronomy 18:9.
Deuteronomy 18:9, it says:
“When you have entered into the land
that Jehovah your God is giving you,
“you must not learn to imitate
the detestable practices of those nations.”
Well, what happened when the Israelites
chose to imitate the nations around them,
to ignore the advice Jehovah had given them?
Well, let’s look at 2 Kings 17:15.
Second Kings 17:15:
“They continued rejecting
his regulations and his covenant
“that he had made with their forefathers
“and his reminders
that he had given to warn them,
“and they kept following worthless idols
“[And notice what happened
to them when they did that.]
“and became worthless themselves,
“imitating the nations all around them
that Jehovah
had commanded them not to imitate.”
So if we imitate worthless things,
what’s going to happen to us?
We’re going to be worthless.
If we fast-forward to Christian times,
we can see
that the same advice was given to us.
If we look at 3 John 11,
it’s very straightforward advice:
“Beloved one, do not imitate what is bad,
“but imitate what is good.
“The one who does good originates with God.
The one who does bad has not seen God.”
Well, the message is clear.
If we want to ‘see God,’
or have a good relationship with Jehovah,
then we need to imitate what is good.
And our text for today at Ephesians 5:1
really says it
about as simply and clearly as we can:
“Become imitators of God.”
So Jehovah is telling us
in our text for today: ‘Imitate me.’
So if someone asks us,
“Who do you choose to imitate?”
we follow the advice of Ephesians 5:1;
we want to imitate Jehovah.
Well, how can we imitate Jehovah?
Well, first, one way is by reading the Bible.
We have learned love, hope, faith, loyalty,
and so many other fine qualities
by reading about how Jehovah
wants us to conduct ourselves.
I mean, look at the Law
that Jehovah gave to the nation of Israel.
We can learn so much about how Jehovah
feels about being honest, clean, fair, just.
Or in different Bible examples,
we see Jehovah’s patience
in dealing with Jonah
and His mercy in dealing with the Ninevites.
Reading the Bible
gives us a very clear picture
of our perfect God, Jehovah,
who we worship.
And he gives us
the perfect role model to imitate.
When we read the Bible
and continually ask ourselves,
‘What do I learn about Jehovah,
and how can I learn to imitate him?’
that really is like us keeping our eye
on Jehovah, with our mind’s eye,
and watching what he’s doing,
and we’re imitating him.
Another way that we can imitate Jehovah
is by imitating others who are imitating him.
Jehovah has used the pages of the Bible
to give us real-life stories
of people who we can imitate.
I mean, we’ve never met Abraham and Sarah,
but don’t you feel like you know them?
I’m sure there’s much more that we can learn
about these beautiful, spiritual people
in the new world,
but what is laid out
in the Scriptures is enough
for us to imitate
the beautiful examples they set for us.
Or what about Jesus?
We’ve never met Jesus,
but by reading the Bible accounts,
don’t you feel like you know him
and you know how he would react
and think about certain situations?
The apostle Paul simply explained this
at 1 Corinthians 11:1.
He said: “Become imitators of me,
. . . as I am of Christ.”
So we have Jesus Christ
as an example of imitating his Father.
The apostle Paul was imitating Christ.
Now, the apostle Paul,
of course, wasn’t saying,
“Imitate the way I give my talks;
imitate the way I move;
imitate the way I walk or say things.”
But at Hebrews 13:7,
he stressed what it was that we
were to imitate about others,
Hebrews 13:7:
“Remember those who
are taking the lead among you,
“who have spoken the word of God to you,
“and as you contemplate
how their conduct turns out,
imitate their faith.”
So we are to imitate the faith
and example that others set in imitating
Jesus and imitating Jehovah.
Now, to illustrate the choice
that we have of who we’re going to imitate,
I’d like you to imagine in your mind
two big, huge machines with lots of parts.
Now, one machine is run
by Jehovah and Jesus Christ,
and the other machine
is run by Satan and the world.
And I want you to imagine
that you’re a part on the mechanics bench.
When Jehovah goes to pick you up
and look at you and see,
Do you fit as a part in his organization?
well, we can if we imitate him
and other spiritual people
who are useful to Jehovah.
We can become a useful part
of his beautiful organization.
If we imitate Jehovah,
then if Satan goes over to that bench
and picks us up
and tries to put us into his machine,
we’re not going to fit anywhere.
We are no part of his world or organization.
I mean, how sad it would be
if we shaped
and imitated ourselves after the world
and when Satan picked us up we fit right in
with his machine and organization!
So who do you choose to imitate?
We choose to imitate Jehovah.
We want to be just like him when we grow up.
How can we imitate Jehovah?
By getting to know him personally
through reading the Bible
and imitating others who are imitating him.